Okay, so let's continue our study of sequences of real numbers.
So we've seen special types of sequences, monotone sequences before and then in the
previous lecture, we looked at sequences obtained from sequences, namely the
sequences that give you the limb soup and limb imp. And we showed that these are
actually limits of sub sequences. Now I'm going to define what looks like a
new class of sequences, but we'll see it's actually not. These are called
Cauchy sequences. Cauchy, not Cauchy, not Cauchy. So French guy, so it's
pronounced Cauchy and probably not even pronounced like that, it's probably got a
different pronunciation by people who actually speak French. So what is the
definition of a Cauchy sequence? Cauchy sequence is intuitively it's a sequence
so that if you go far enough out in the sequence, any two entries in that sequence
are close together. Okay, so convergent sequences had the property that if you go
far enough out, the entries in the sequence are getting close to a real number.
Cauchy sequence is that any two entries are close to each other. So a Cauchy
sequence is Cauchy if we're all epsilon positive. There exists an M, natural number, such
that if N is bigger than or equal to M and K is bigger than or equal to M, then Xn minus
Xk is less than epsilon. So maybe not, let me not write if, I mean it's the same
statement, but since it looks a little, so it'll look a little more like previous
statements, let me put it for all there. So you have a definition here, you should,
it's a definition of a new thing, you should now try to look at an example and then
possibly negate the definition to see if you really understand it. So an example of
Cauchy sequence is X of N equals 1 over N, our favorite sequence. So let's prove this.
We have to, so all we have is the definition. So we have to verify that X of N equals 1 over
N verifies the definition of being Cauchy. So just like when we try to prove something
as convergent, which is a for all epsilon statement, the first thing you have to do is let
epsilon be positive. And then I have to choose M and show that that capital M produces this
statement here. So choose M, a natural number, so that 1 over M is less than epsilon over
2. So I could phrase that as capital M being bigger than 2 over epsilon, but I'm going
to say if I take N bigger than or equal to capital M and K bigger than or equal to capital
M, then this difference is less than epsilon. Then if N is bigger than or equal to M, K is
bigger than or equal to M. And I look at 1 over N minus 1 over K. This is less than or
equal to by the triangle inequality, the absolute value of each of these added together,
which is just 1 over N plus 1 over K. And since these are both bigger than or equal
to M, each one is less than or equal to 1 over M, 1 over M. So I get 2 over M, which
by our choice of M is less than epsilon. So X of N equals 1 over N is an example of a
Cauchy sequence. So let's negate the definition. And then we'll obtain, look at an example of
a sequence which is not Cauchy. And as you'll probably guess, if this is our favorite
sequence which converges, this is our favorite sequence which doesn't converge, will be
an example of a sequence which is not Cauchy. And this shouldn't come as a surprise because
again, a sequence which is Cauchy, if you go far enough out, any two entries are close to each
other. But if we look at, for example, the sequence minus 1 to the N, which is just minus 1 plus 1 minus
1, any two entries will differ by, or you can always choose two entries that differ by 2
in distance. So let's negate this definition
to get what it means for something not to be Cauchy. So I'll write all that out.
X sub N is not Cauchy. If so, every time we see a for all, it becomes there exists.
If there exists a bad epsilon not, positive such that for all in a natural number,
you can find two entries further out than M that are greater than epsilon not distance to
each other. So there exists N bigger than or equal to M and K bigger than or equal to M such
that X sub N minus X okay, it's bigger than or equal to this bad epsilon.
Okay. So again, I mean the definition of Cauchy means that as long as I go far enough out
in the sequence, this distance is supposed to be less than epsilon. So for all of epsilon
positive, there exists a capital M. So that I have this picture. If I choose X sub K plus 1,
then it should also be within distance epsilon to X sub N or X sub K. So they're getting closer
and closer together. The negation means that they're not getting closer and closer together to each
other. So there exists some small distance so that you can always go as far out as you want
and find two entries that are greater than epsilon not distance to each other.
So what's an example of that? Like I said, the sequence minus 1 to the N is not Cauchy.
Okay. That looks...
That just doesn't look right and there we go.
Now it is. Okay. So this is not Cauchy. So that means there should exist some bad epsilon not so I
two entries in the sequence differing from each other by epsilon not in distance. So
basically any two entries other than, you know, I can always find two entries in the sequence
which differ from each other by two. So that'll be my bad epsilon not. So if you like, here's a proof.
Choose epsilon not equals two. Let M be a natural number. So now we have to find an element of
this entries in the sequence further out than M whose distance to each other is bigger than or
equal to two. We can just take M plus 1 and capital M, choose N equals M and K equals M plus 1.
So these are both bigger than or equal to M. Then minus 1 to the N minus 1 to the K. This is equal to
1 minus minus 1 after I factor out minus 1 to the capital M which equals 2. Okay.
So minus 1 to the N is not Cauchy.
All right. So at the beginning said that this will look like a definition of a new
type of sequence but it's not really. So as it turns out,
so the elements of the sequence are getting closer and closer together as you go far enough out.
So they're all kind of clustering near each other which kind of makes you think they're all
clustering near something in the real number line and therefore maybe this sequence is convergent.
Now this is true and we'll prove this is that every that a sequence is Cauchy if and only if it's
convergent. Now this is true only for the real numbers and I'll say a little bit about this in a
minute or not only true for the real numbers but it's not true for the rational numbers and I'll
get to that in just a second. So what we're going to prove is that a sequence is Cauchy if and
only if it is convergent. So the first thing I want to show is that Cauchy sequences are bounded.
So the proof of this statement is essentially the same as the proof that convergent sequences
are bounded so let me draw a picture that goes along with this proof. So as long as I go far
enough out there exists an M so that we're all n bigger than or equal to capital M. I can say this.
Let's look at this entry x of M. Then for all n bigger than or equal to capital M all of the
other entries have to be within a certain distance to x of N based on the definition of Cauchy.
So let's say I make that distance 1 and let's say 0 is over here just for this picture.
So then for all n bigger than or equal to x of N for all n bigger than or equal to capital M x of
N lies in this interval here. And therefore we'll get that x of N is bounded. So the way this picture looks,
I'm going to write it this way, this one plus one. Now that handles all n bigger than or equal to
capital M. So we just need to deal with the first capital M minus one other guys. So maybe there's
capital M minus one is over here. Capital x of one is over there. Capital x of two is over here.
So then our bound will just be this one which handles all of the n bigger than or equal to M plus
the absolute values of these guys that we missed. Okay?
All right, so
x N is Cauchy. There exists an M natural number such that
for all n bigger than or equal to M,
k bigger than or equal to M, x of N minus x of k is less than one in distance.
So this is certainly true for k equals capital M.
So this implies for all n bigger than or equal to M, x of N minus x of capital M is less than one.
So now if I use the triangle inequality, I can show that the previous implies that for all n bigger than or equal to M,
if I look at the absolute value of x of N, this is equal to x of N minus x of capital M plus
capital M. And this is less than or equal to the absolute value of this guy plus the absolute value of
this guy and this is bounded by one. Okay? So in summary, I've shown that for all n bigger than or equal to
this fixed integer capital M, x of N is less than or equal to x capital M in absolute value plus one.
Okay? So that's for all little n bigger than or equal to capital M. So now I just need to pick a big enough number
that bounds the first capital M entries that are not covered by this inequality. Okay? Capital M is fixed.
All right? So let b be the absolute value of x of one plus absolute value of x of two plus
plus. Okay? So this fixed number now, then we're all in bigger than or equal to capital M. I have by
this inequality up here. This is a sum of non negative numbers, so this number is certainly bigger than
or equal to just this part. And if I have n bigger than equal to one and less than m,
then x of N is going to be the absolute value of this guy is going to be one of these that appears
here, which is certainly less than or equal to if I add on this number and the others, which is less
than or equal to b. Okay? So now I've found a b, which is non negative, which bounds all the absolute values.
And therefore, this proves that the sequence is bounded.
Okay? So we've shown that a Cauchy sequence is bounded.
And so what I'm now going to show is the following. So again, all of the entries are getting
close to each other. They're kind of clustering near each other. So it kind of feels like they want
to converge. And this next theorem says that, well, if you've identified a limit along a
subsequence, then in fact the entire sequence converges. Okay? So of course, this is not true for
an arbitrary sequence. If a subsequence converges, or should say for an arbitrary sequence, it does not,
it's not true that a subsequence converging implies a full sequence converging. We have minus one
to the n for which a subsequence converges, but the whole sequence does not converge. But if we make
the additional hypothesis that the sequence is Cauchy, then the sequence converges if and only if
that subsequence converges. So statement of the theorem is following.
If X sub n is Cauchy, and
if there exists a subsequence, which is converging to some number, call it X,
then the sequence, full sequence converges to X. Okay? So if I have, so if I, what I was saying
right before, I stated a theorem is that if I hide this part and just say there exists a subsequence
which is converging to X, this does not imply that the full sequence converges to X because we have
this example of minus one to the n. But if I also assume the sequence is Cauchy, then it does
follow that Cauchy plus subsequence converging implies the full sequence converges.
Okay, so I want to show that X n converges to X, so I want to show.
And we're going to do this just by using the definition by verifying this through the
definition, not using the squeeze theorem or anything like that. So let epsilon be positive.
Since X n is Cauchy,
there exists m not natural number such that for all n bigger than or equal to m, not
and K bigger than or equal to m not X of n minus X of K, it's less than epsilon over 2. Why
is epsilon over 2? Well, we have, or why should you not be surprised? Well, we have two assumptions
here. So, you know, like we did when we did convergence of products of sequences and so on,
which include, which had two assumptions, namely two sequences converged to something. Typically,
that means we'll have two integers coming, we'll choose a bigger integer and then some up in
equalities to get an epsilon, so that's a little bit of a rambling answer to why we get an epsilon
sequence. So I didn't, this subsequence converges to X. There exists another integer, m sub 1,
such that if K is bigger than or equal to m sub 1, then X sub n sub K,
minus X is less than epsilon over 2. So maybe I should have used a different
letter here, let's use a little m. So I don't want you to think these have to be the same K.
So now we'll choose an integer bigger than both m1 and m2.
And show that it works. Choose m to be m0 plus m1.
Then,
now we need to show this works. And if n is bigger than or equal to m,
so this, so let me actually make a first observation before I go to the n bigger than or equal to
capital m. Then simply because we, since n sub K is bigger than or equal to K,
for all K, a natural number, just because the n sub K is there in increasing sequence of
integers, which starts at least at 1. Since n sub K is bigger than or equal to K for all K,
this implies that the integer n sub capital m is bigger than or equal to m, which remembers m0
plus m1, which implies that n sub m is bigger than or equal to m0, and n sub m is bigger than or equal to m1.
Okay, so I just wanted to make that this preliminary observation. And now we'll go to showing that this capital m works.
Now, if n is bigger than or equal to capital m, I look at x sub n minus x in absolute value and add and subtract x sub m capital m
capital m minus x, and use the triangle inequality.
Then, okay, so since n is bigger than or equal to capital m, which is bigger than or equal to m0,
that means n is bigger than or equal to m0. And then n sub m, we just showed is bigger than or equal to m0.
So by this inequality, I get that the first term is less than epsilon over 2.
And now n sub m, okay, so m is certainly bigger than or equal to m sub 1.
And therefore, I will get that this part is less than epsilon over 2 because of this inequality.
Okay, so that capital choice of capital m works.
And now, we'll prove the following that a sequence is convergent if and only if it's koshi.
Okay.
All right, so this is a two-way street.
So we need to show the left implies the right and then the right implies the left.
Okay.
All right, so this direction is in fact easy.
Based on what we've done, I shouldn't say it's easy, but what we've done so far, it quickly follows.
So we're assuming x of n is koshi and trying to show it's convergent.
Then, so if x of n is koshi, this implies that x of n is bounded,
the sequence is bounded, which implies by the bosono virus-trust theorem that x of n has
a convergent subsequence.
And by the theorem, we just proved if a koshi sequence has a convergent subsequence,
it must be convergent.
Now, for the converse direction, that xn is convergent implies xn is koshi.
Well, I mean, so this should not come as a surprise.
Let me draw a picture.
Let's suppose x of n is converging to x and epsilon is positive.
Then, since the xn's are converging to x, if I go to,
if I draw a little interval around x of length, total length epsilon, so x minus epsilon over 2,
and x plus epsilon over 2, then I will find, as long as, so then there exists m,
so that for all n bigger than or equal to capital m, all of the x events lie in this
interval.
They all lie in this interval because they have to be within distance epsilon over 2 to x.
If the xn's are converging to x, and since they lie in this interval,
the distance between any two of them can only be as big as the length of the interval,
which is epsilon.
This is essentially the picture of y, a convergent sequence, has to be koshi,
so now let's turn this picture into math.
We have to verify that we have to verify xn is koshi through the definition that's all we have.
So let epsilon be positive, since the xn's converged to x,
there exists an integer m sub zero, natural number, such that for all n bigger than or equal to
m sub zero, x sub n minus x is less than epsilon over 2.
And so we'll choose the m for our definition of koshi to be this m sub zero.
And if n is bigger than or equal to m, and k is bigger than or equal to m,
Now look at the absolute value of x of n minus x of k, and add and subtract x,
and use the triangle inequality.
This is less than or equal to x of n minus x, and absolute value, plus x minus x of k.
Each of these is less than epsilon over 2, since n is bigger than or equal to capital m,
and k is bigger than or equal to capital m, so this is less than epsilon over 2, plus epsilon over 2,
equals epsilon, and therefore xn is koshi.
Now, I want to make a brief remark about previous theorem.
So remember how this whole story started off?
There was something wrong with the rational numbers.
Namely, they didn't contain the square root of 2, so we couldn't solve the algebraic equation
x squared minus 2 equals 0. But this also then turned into the rationals not being
complete in the sense of order, not every bounded set, non-empty bounded set,
has it had a supremum, it didn't have the least upper bound property.
But you can also interpret this lack of having square root of 2,
as somehow saying that the rationals are incomplete in this sense.
So hopefully, at the end of this class, we'll be able to get to metric spaces.
So what do I mean by that?
Let's say I look at this statement now within the universe of rational numbers.
So now, if this sequence is
rational numbers, meaning sequences are only sequences of rational numbers.
Limits are only elements of the rational numbers.
Epsilon is only a rational number and so on.
Then we still have many of the same theorems that we proved, not all of them,
and I'll indicate which ones don't hold. But if we only work in rationals, then we always do have
convergence implies Cauchy, meaning convergence sequences are Cauchy.
But Cauchy sequences are not necessarily convergent.
Again, what's the example here?
What's the intuitive example?
Take X sub n so that X sub n is in q, and now viewed in the universe of real numbers,
X sub n is converged to root 2.
Then such a sequence would be a Cauchy sequence.
So such a sequence would be a Cauchy sequence of rational numbers.
However, it would not converge in the set of rational numbers.
It would converge to the square root of 2, which is not a rational number.
So because the square root of 2 is not a rational number, this shows that the rational numbers do not have
this completeness property that Cauchy sequences converge.
So there's a whole still to this day kind of industry of studying spaces for which
Cauchy is equivalent to convergent. These are called complete metric spaces.
And then if you add a little more structure, they're called Banach spaces and so on.
Which are very important, not just in math, but also for
formulating rigorously a lot of the underlying assumptions for mathematical physics.
But if we're just looking inside the rationales, it does not follow that Cauchy sequences always converge.
And now let's just stop for a minute and take stock of why this was true for the real numbers.
What did we use going back?
So if you think, if you really go back to the proof of the Bolzano-Vierstrasse,
that's what we used here to show that Cauchy sequences converge,
we used the fact that the lymph soup and the lymph always exist.
And lymph first off, they're defined to be soups and amps, which may not always exist as
rational numbers as we've already shown.
That's definitely a problem already there.
But even more so, when we prove that every bounded monotone sequence converges,
what we showed was that this limit is actually a soup of a certain set or an inf of a certain set.
Which again, may or may not exist if we're just looking in the rational numbers because the
rational numbers do not have the least upper bound property. So it really is the least upper
bound property that gives us convergence equivalent to Cauchy for the real numbers.
So for R, the least upper bound property is, I mean, it has to be because that's the
main thing that separates the two fields. But I'm just reiterating this here, is the reason
why convergent is equivalent to Cauchy.
Okay.
Now that I've proved that Cauchy is equivalent to convergence,
maybe you'll ask then why did we introduce it at all? I mean,
that these two notions are the same. Why prove, why even introduce them if they're just
convergent sequences already. And the reason is because to show that a sequence converges,
you have to somehow have your hands on a candidate for the limit. If you want to
prove that x in converges, you have to somehow come up with an x that it converges to.
And it's not always clear how to find that x. Okay.
But Cauchy, although it's equivalent to a convergent in the set of real numbers,
doesn't require you to find a candidate for convergence. Okay. All it requires you to do is show
that as long as you go far enough out, any two entries in the sequence are close together.
Okay. Without requiring you to come up with a limit.
See, computing limits is quite difficult. We're about to do series, right? And there's maybe like,
I don't know, five series people can compute explicitly. But you do know that there's a
ton of other series that are actually convergent, even though you don't know what the limit is.
And why do you know that? This is exactly because, and exactly why,
people thought of Cauchy sequences to begin with, much of analysis. So, again, just to summarize this,
you know, convergent sequences are nice, but in practice, it's difficult to get your hands on what
could be a limit of a sequence, especially if that sequence is pretty complicated. So if you're
trying to show a certain sequence converges, it suffices by what we've done here to show that it's
Cauchy. And that's a little bit easier to do because that just requires you to work with the
original sequence. You don't have to come up with a limit. You can just take your sequence and start
playing directly with the entries rather than try to come up with a limit.
So, that's what we're going to move on to is series now, which, as I said a minute ago, is
an original reason why people started developing the foundations of analysis, you know, what we're
talking about right now to begin with, because they were just kind of doing very formal things that
ended up not making sense, like trying to add up, they were adding infinitely many positive
numbers and coming up with a negative number. That can't be right. So, all of this was
created, discovered however you want to phrase it, to put on rigorous foundations this next topic,
which is series. So, I mean, you dealt with series, you know, as an encounterlist, you know,
what a series is. Maybe you don't remember all the proofs of the properties of series, but,
you know, suffice to say this is, you know, series is a pretty good motivation since it's one of
the most useful things that comes out of math. I mean, series are how you solve series expansions
or how you solve ODEs, PDEs, you know, Taylor expansions, all these things are some sense
of form of series, so being able to justify them as being real things is a necessity. So,
the definition of a series for now is really is just a dissymbol, I'm about to write down. So,
the symbol, or maybe I'll just sometimes write just some exo-bin is what's called the series
associated to the sequence exo-bin. So, right now that's just a symbol. We're going to interpret
the series converges if the following sequence given by s sub m equals, so what is this, so s sub m,
this is the element of the sequence, and what is it, it is the actual sum, so this is not a
formal thing, this is just a finite sum from n equals 1 to m, so this is, so this sequence now, m
equals 1 to infinity, and these guys we called, we call partial sums converges.
So, right now if we just have a sequence exo-bin, this series associated to that sequence is just
a symbol, we say that the series converges if the sequence of partial sums converge, and if
s is this limit, then we write s is equal to the series,
and treat the series now as a number. So, in general if I have a sequence I just have this
formal symbol which I'm writing down, which I call a series associated to it, in the case that
the sequence of partial sums converges, then I actually identify this series with a real number
and treat it as a real number. So, when I've written this, the series is starting at 1, but
we just say here that we don't necessarily have to start series at n equals 1.
So, this could be sum from n equals 0 to infinity, in which case we have a sequence starting
now at x sub 0, or this could be starting at 2, in which place the sequence of exo-bin starts
at n equals 2, and then the sequence of partial sums would start at not m equals 1, but m equals 0,
or m equals 2, depending on where the series starts. So, some examples, the series sum from n equals 1
over n, n plus 1 times n. This is a convergent series.
So, why is this? So, let's look at the proof. So, we look at the mth partial sum, this is the sum from
n equals 1 to m of 1 over n plus 1, n, and this is equal to, now if I write 1 over n plus 1 times n
as 1 over n minus 1 over n plus 1, this is now the sum of 1 over n plus these are finite.
So, I can always split them up, this should be a minus, and so now this is equal to 1 plus a half plus
plus 1 over m minus 1 half plus a third plus 1 over m plus 1 over m plus 1, and you see all of
these cancel, and all that's left is 1 minus 1 over m plus 1. So, the mth partial sum is equal to 1 minus 1 over
m plus 1, and therefore the sequence of partial sums is the limit as m goes to infinity of this,
which is just 1, and therefore this series converges.
Now, our favorite sequence, which does not converge, will give us a series, which does not converge.
So, let's look at sum from n equals 1 to infinity minus 1 to the n, this does not converge.
So, let's approve the mth partial sum, this is equal to minus 1 plus 1 plus minus 1
up until I get minus 1 to the m, and therefore this is always equal to 1 of 2 things.
If m is odd, then I have an odd number of these guys, and therefore the minuses and pluses
cancel just leaving a minus 1 in the end, this last one, the odd one, and m is odd, and 0,
if m is even. If I've added up an even number of these terms, then all of the minus ones and
ones cancel out, so I just get 0. And therefore this sequence, which is just minus 1 for m odd,
0 for m even, does not converge. And therefore the series does not converge. So, when I write this,
this is just a symbol, this is just chalk on a chalkboard, it doesn't mean anything.
All right, so let's go to another series, which does converge, and this is kind of
the one to which we compare all other series, essentially, as you'll see.
You have all these series tests that you remember, hopefully, from calculus,
that tells you when a series converges, but maybe if you remember the proof or don't,
how you do that is you converge it to one series, which you do know how to sum. So, it was just
by pure luck we were able to compute the sum or compute the explicit series for this guy.
Another one which we can do, that for is a geometric series. So, the theorem is if I have a real
number with absolute value less than 1, then the series starting now at 0 are to the n converges,
and I can actually compute some of this series, and this is 1 over 1 minus r.
So, what's the proof? Let's look at the partial sums, and we can actually compute these as well,
just as we were able to do for the first example. We compute that to sum from
n equals 0 to m of r to the m. Now, you can prove this by induction. I think I cannot exactly
remember if I did this. I believe I did in the second lecture on induction, first or second
lecture on induction, but if I add up some number raised to the nth, so this should be to the n,
nth power from 0 to m, this is equal to 1 minus r to the m plus 1 over 1 minus r.
And I guess two lectures ago, we proved that if the absolute value, so let me state this now,
let's make it m of r to the m equals 0, which implies that, so this was the
nth partial sum, which implies that the limit as m goes to infinity of s sub m equals the limit
as m goes to infinity of this thing, which is, if you like, this is, okay, so that plus 1 there,
just multiplies r to the m by r, and using the algebraic facts we proved about limits is 1 minus
r times 0 over 1 minus r, which equals 1 over 1 minus r. Okay? So now you ask about the other,
what about r bigger than 1? Well, when r equals minus 1, then we get the second example we
look at, if we get r equals 1, then that's just summing up 1, and I leave it to you to check
that that does not converge, that the sequence of partial sums, if I just sum up 1 from n equals
0 to m is equal to m plus 1, which does not converge. All right.
And let me make just a kind of silly comment, and maybe I didn't explicitly make this comment about
sequences, maybe I forgot to do that as well. So for a sequence, a sequence, so you could start your
sequence not necessarily at the first entry, maybe you look at a, if you like, new sequence where
you're going to get the first entry. Well, okay. So we know from sequences that sub sequences of
convergent sequences converge. So if I, instead of looking at the whole sequence, start at, let's
say, x 100, and then go x 101, x 102, and that's the sequence I look at. Well, that's a sub sequence
of the original one, which if it converges implies that sub sequence converges. So all that is to say,
and for this simple way of obtaining this new sequence, all of that is to say that to
understand if a sequence converges, I don't have to consider what happens for the first
finally many terms in the sequence, meaning a sequence x sub n converges if and only if
a sequence starting now at say n equals 100, 101, 102, 103, and so on converges. Okay.
And the same is true for a series that a series converges if and only if, you know,
a series converges now starting at a different point along the sequence. So this is
following theorem. Let x in be a sequence and let capital m be natural number. Then
n equals 1 to infinity of x sub n, this converges if and only if the sequence now starting at capital
m converges. Meaning when I have to decide whether a series converges or not, it doesn't matter
what's going on for the first finally many terms. Okay. What matters is what's going on as I
keep adding terms from further and further out of this sequence. And what's the proof? The
proof is just expressing the partial sums for this guy in terms of the partial sums for this guy.
So partial sum satisfied for all m sum from n equals 1 to m and now
x sub n as sum from n equals capital m to m x sub n plus sum from n equals 1 to m minus 1
x sub n. Okay. So this is now just a fixed number. So this is the sequence of partial sums
corresponding to this series. This is the sequence of partial sums corresponding to this series
and this is just a fixed number. Therefore if this converges then this side converges to this plus
this fixed number. So maybe I'm going a little quick but so if this converges then this converges
to this minus this number and if this converges then this sequence of partial sums converges to
this limit plus this fixed number. Okay. And that's all I'm going to write. Okay.
Now coming back to the usefulness of Cauchy sequences. I mean this is kind of where they
really become useful in the study of series because again it's difficult to sum. So when I
keep talking about saying the word sum a series I'm talking about you know find the limit of
partial sum. But because we have this equivalence between Cauchy sequences and convergent sequences
to decide if a series is convergent or not we can just decide if in some sense it's Cauchy
or not. So let me make this definition. We say that a series x sub n is Cauchy if the sequence
of partial sums again these are I'm just going to put an m up top because this may start at zero
or n equals one or something so the sequence of partial sums is Cauchy.
Okay. And so let me just restate what we proved for sequences in terms of series so we proved
that every Cauchy sequence is convergent. So a series is Cauchy if it only means that the
sequence of partial sums is Cauchy but we proven that Cauchy sequences are convergent. So if
this is Cauchy then it's convergent and vice versa. So based on what we've proven already for sequences
it follows that and this just follows immediately from what we've proven already so I'm not even
going to write a proof. A series is Cauchy if and only if a series is convergent. Again because
both are defined in terms of the sequence of partial sums associated to the series and we've
already proven the equivalence between Cauchy and convergence for sequences.
Now let me write what it means to be Cauchy in a slightly different way.
And it's the following so. So before we had that a sequence is Cauchy intuitively if
the elements of the sequence are getting close to each other. Now for a series to be Cauchy
the intuitive way to think about it is that the tail of the sum is getting small.
It's getting arbitrarily small. Tail of the sum being if I add up
finitely many numbers far enough out. So a series is Cauchy if and only if
if we're all absolutely positive there exists a m natural number such that
for all integers L bigger than m which is bigger than or equal to capital m
sum from n equals n plus 1 to L of x of n. So this is some involving terms that are pretty far out.
There are at least all indexed by something bigger than or equal to capital m is less than epsilon.
A series is Cauchy if you're kind of adding up smaller and smaller pieces. Not individual
pieces but actual like adding those up. Okay so I'll leave it to you to do kind of I mean they're
both pretty easy but this direction I'll leave it to you as an exercise and it'll follow
immediately from what I'm going to write for essentially this direction.
So let's suppose and let's make things concrete starting somewhere. Let's suppose this sum is Cauchy
and we want to prove now that it has this property. Okay so let epsilon
be positive. If we now want to produce some capital number m so that this holds.
So since the sequence of partial sums, S of m is Cauchy that's what it means for the series
to be Cauchy. There exists a natural number capital m such that for all m bigger than or equal to
m not and L bigger than or equal to m not S of m minus S of L is less than epsilon.
So let's actually take capital m to be this m not. Choose m to be m not. Then if L is bigger than
m which is bigger than or equal to m not, bigger than or equal to m which is equal to m not.
If I look at this sum from n equals m plus 1 to L x of n I can write this. So this is absolute value.
So in fact let me remove the absolute value so that this becomes pretty clear.
I can write this sum as the Lth partial sum minus the mth partial sum.
Right because the Lth partial sum sums from n equals 1 up to L the mth partial sums from n equals
1 up to m. So the sum containing only the terms between m plus 1 and L is the difference of these
guys. So now I'll put on absolute values. And this thing because L and m are bigger than or
equal to capital m which is equal to m not and because I have this inequality this is less than
epsilon. And the converse direction again it follows immediately essentially from this equality
here. So to check whether a series converges I don't have to somehow come up with a limit for this
series, a sum for this series. I can just prove that kind of the tail can be made arbitrarily small
as long as I go far enough out in the series. Okay.
And from this we get a pretty simple elementary property. So theorem
if a series converges then this implies that the limit as n goes to infinity of x of n of the
sequence you used to obtain the series equals 0. Okay. So this should you know fall in line with
you know a series being convergent if and only if it satisfies this property here.
Right which is somehow saying the tail of the sum is getting smaller and smaller which means
you can't be adding up big things as you go on out in the series.
So proof. So we'll show this by
simple epsilon delta or epsilon m definition. So suppose x n converges then x n the series is
0. And now I'm going to verify this using the epsilon m definition. Let epsilon be positive.
Since x n is cosy this implies that there exists a natural number m not such that for all L
bigger than or equal to m bigger than or equal to m not. I have that condition there some from
in equals m plus 1 to L. x of n is less than epsilon.
Choose m to be m not plus 1. Okay. This is so y m not plus 1 but not exactly and not just because
basically what I'm going to do is I'm going to take L to be equal to m plus 1 and the index gets
shifted by 1. Then if m is bigger than or equal to m I get that the absolute value of x sub m.
Maybe I'll instead of saying limit as n goes to infinity I'll write limit as m goes to infinity
as just a change in the dummy variable. This is equal to sum from n equals m to m x of n.
And now so I've shifted this so now little m is bigger than or equal to m not plus 1.
So you could write this as if you like m minus 1 plus 1. So little m minus 1 is bigger than or
equal to m not. So by this inequality this is less than epsilon.
Okay.
And so we see that if a series converges the terms the individual
terms x sub n must converge to zero. So there's another reason why this series minus 1 to the end is not converged
because those terms do not converge. This also tells us that for this geometric series when r is
greater than or equal to 1 an absolute value the series does not converge.
This is not converged. Okay. And the proof is and we proved this in fact like a few lectures
ago a few lectures ago as well that if absolute value of r is bigger than 1 then limit as n goes
to infinity of r to the n this limit does not exist. We showed it's in fact unbounded.
Right. This is r to the n is an unbounded sequence. So
does not converge. So I'm using that theorem over there in a little bit round about way. Let me
let me state. Let me restate this theorem over here. This theorem says
if the series converges then the series the limit this limit equals zero. Now this statement is
logically equivalent to the negation of the converse or the there's an actual word for that but
I can't remember. Namely that the negation of this implies the negation of this.
Okay. So a logically equivalent way to rewrite that statement over there is that
that if this limit is not equal to zero so if it doesn't exist at all that's also fine.
This implies that does not converge. Okay. So you know this
restatement of the theorem over there is really what I used to prove is really what I used here.
All right. And I think I'll stop there. Next time we'll see that this theorem here
is a one-way street and I think you covered this example and probably calculus namely that
one-way street in the sense that if x n converges then this limit is zero but the converse does not hold
namely it is not true that if the limit at this limit is zero then this converges. Okay. We'll see the
famed harmonic series next time.